The Data Structure Under The Bed

As someone who has gotten into Ruby development in a non-traditional way, there's a lot about actual computer science that still mystifies me -- to the point of terror. During my first six months of being a developer, whenever someone talked about "algorithms" or "data structures" or anything that had a vaguely CS-vibe, I did the grown-up equivalent of rocking back and forth under the blankets, pretending there wasn't a monster in the closet. Maybe you've had similar fears or struggles. But together, we can figure out how to shine a night-light on these scary topics, and remember that that big lump under the bed is really just a heap. (Of dirty clothes.)

Details:
I haven't yet fleshed out the whole structure of my talk, but I imagine it will run pretty close to this:

The first few minutes will be on how I got here. Similar to many beginner Rubyists, I took an accelerated, non-traditional program that focused on the practical, not theoretical side of development. Algorithms and data structures were things used to weed out candidates during a technical interview.

I'll discuss how bandying about words like "algorithm" without properly defining them can be harmful to the education of budding developers. (Which will be useful to those interested in being more teachers).

Next, I'll discuss the importance of algorithms beyond the context of those interview questions -- it's easy to think, when you're starting out using Ruby for web applications, that concepts like big O and growth rate aren't really applicable. But of course, working on big sites that are pulling large data sources, optimzing your runtime becomes exponentially (there's a pun in here somewhere) more important.

After that, I'll go into the big reason of why I suddenly thought that all this theory was important -- because, of course, I had an internship at a company that thought it was important. Being told in no uncertain terms that if you don't learn this stuff, you can't be hired, was a scary shove down this path. BUT just because my initial start was scary, doesn't mean everyone's should be!

Next I'll talk about how I, personally, got over my terror of trying to write/design algorithms. These factors include:

1. Getting a big push from my mentor
2. Leaning heavily on friends/people I knew that understood these concepts very deeply helping me 1-1
3. A lot of time reading about each algorithm or data structure I attempted to implement before I tried it.
4. Visualizing what the algorithm was trying to do, or what the data structure looks like.
(Maybe here I'll explain what a heap is because it's my favorite data structure and it's super fun. While I don't plan for this talk to be technical, I think it would be cool to have something a little more concrete.)

Finally: my big realization. After doing a whole laundry list of algorithms -- the Fibonacci sequence, Pascal's Triangle, a whole mess of sorts, and implementing some data structures (which can be tricky in Ruby), I got to the point where I realized that it was fun. And that's the biggest thing -- getting to the point where realizing that this stuff is just programming in really specific, beautiful ways.

Has learning this stuff changed my programming abilities in any real way? 
